---
layout: post
title: Welcome to the new site!
description: 
headline: TLDR moved off WP to Jekyll on App Engine
modified: 2016-09-18
category: personal
tags: [update, jekyll]
image:
---
Hi!

I recently started a new job at RentTrack, a startup which helps people build credit just by paying their rent.  I'm doing cloud engineering there, getting all their machines into Chef cookbooks, ensuring availability, and generally helping out wherever I can.  Working there for the past 2 or so weeks has rekindled my interest in some of my personal projects.  I'm hoping to update this site more frequently, if not with interesting tech stuff, with interesting anecdotes and observations from my life.

You can probably see pretty clearly that I'm no longer on Wordpress.  I've moved everything over to [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com), which compiles markdown (and other) files into static HTML.  I'm hosting the resulting files with Google App Engine.  Static means fast, since there's nothing "clever" happening to slow things down.  I picked a fairly complicated template so performance isn't as good as it could be, but compiling the markdown pages to static pages are still usually under a second.  This is a massive improvement over Wordpress on a VPS, which needs frequent patching and monitoring to make sure none of my processes were OOM killed because I didn't tune them right.  I'm hosting these pages on App Engine because I use AWS at work, and I've heard such good things about App Engine's ease of use and minimal maintenance, and also because I want to get exposure to the alternatives to what I'm using at work.  Also, I bought my new domain from Google, so I figure it's best to keep everything in one place for ease of management.

Getting started with Jekyll was a breeze.  I just installed the Ruby gem with `gem install jekyll` (you'll need bundler too), and ran `jekyll new .` in the directory I wanted to work on my files in.  It created a skeleton of directories, and I could get started right away.  Sometimes, I wanted to check my work in a browser.  Running `jekyll serve` compiled and served my page on port 4000.  I referred to [the docs](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/home/) a couple of times, and they proved to be very helpful.

App Engine was just as much of a breeze to get set up.
