---
layout: post
title: Ranting about Ruby
description:
headline:
modified: 2016-12-17
category: rant
tags: [update, ruby, chef, vagrant]
image:
---
Hey folks!  Been thinking about writing a post for a while now, but I couldn't think of a topic.  This evening after work, I realized that the past few months I've had this running internal monologue about how much I dislike Ruby.  So this isn't so much of a useful post that you can get information from as me venting.  If you're looking for something useful, leave now.

Ruby is my least favorite language so far (in my _vast_ experience of several years of actual programming beyond the absolute basics </sarcasm>).  I don't think I've run into so many issues with any other language.  It's runtime is as slow to start up as the JVM, it's got as many different ways of doing something as Javascript, and numerous packages in the little microcosm I'm working in has excessive compatibility-breaking changes in patch and minor releases.  Aesthetically, I have a preference for languages which use parens, curlies, and the occasional semicolon.  It's just what I learned first, no other reason.  Ruby lets you use parens and curlies as you would in C-like languages, but the default style linter (rubocop) discourages their use where you'd expect them (function(){multiline function contents}) and using them in a C-like way is not a common style you'll see most Ruby developers using.  Most of the time, Ruby methods are just `method` `param`.  Chef likes to do this same syntax for setting variables.  Other languages do this, too, so it's not a unique complaint (I'm looking at you, Groovy), but it's a complaint nonetheless.

The performance I've experienced in Ruby has been a bit slow, too.  This might just be the application I'm trying to use (Chef).  I doubt my initial reaction on this because [isrubyfastyet.com](http://www.isrubyfastyet.com/) seems to show some pretty decent benchmarks and they don't seem to have an ulterior motive (selling a product).  That being said, a shell script can do the same thing a Chef cookbook does in nearly half the time.  My example is creating a yum repo (nginx), installing a package from that repo (guess what package? ;) ), and installing pip.  Here's [the script](https://gist.github.com/sjohnson4590/69865a5f4e2dbfcb18a8f06109025fc5), here's [the cookbook](https://gist.github.com/sjohnson4590/a40a54a03d5fe8bcd91243ceff642506).  I only had Vagrant handy for this experiment, which may add additional time to the Chef run, so throw these results out if you like, or create your own results.  Here's what I got:

Note: this test assumes that chef-client is already installed.  I only have vagrant handy, throw the test out if you'd like.

{% highlight sh linenos %}
Steve@LAPTOP-86JCBODB MINGW64 ~/repos/devbox (master)
$ time vagrant provision
<snipped>
real    0m23.612s
user    0m0.000s
sys     0m0.015s
{% endhighlight %}

And the shell script:

{% highlight sh linenos %}
[root@devbox ~]# time ./bash_example.sh
<snipped>
real    0m13.058s
user    0m4.811s
sys     0m1.003s
{% endhighlight %}

so, could be faster.

The community's got some problems, too. One example that sticks in my head (paraphrased, obviously):

> Dev: we don't want to support the plugin we wrote any more, so we're just going to make the latest version throw an error message saying you shouldn't use it any longer

> Community: We're using that, dude!

> Dev: (3 months later, ignoring numerous PRs) OK fine, we'll make it shell out to the command line tool!

Working with Ruby (and Chef, specifically) has been a hell of version switching and dependency management since I started using it.  I'm starting to see why people get [Not Invented Here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Not_invented_here) syndrome.  For every community-written dependency I add, it adds 10 others.  Frequently, my dependencies have mutual, conflicting dependencies, which, as I mentioned before, have breaking API changes in minor or patch releases, causing those two dependencies to become mutually exclusive in my project.  This has happened to me at least 3 times in the past month.  Luckily, it's usually pretty readily apparent as soon as I start trying to add whatever dependency to my project.

I'd like to get my tooling off Ruby in general, but that doesn't seem easily doable.  I can at least get off Chef for my personal projects, but it's not going away for work projects anytime soon.  Oh well, c'est la vie.
